IPNS-over-PubSub as an Independent Transport (#218)
ipfs/specs: naming/pubsub.md

# Organization of this document

  - [Introduction](#introduction)
  - [Protocol Overview](#pubsub-protocol-overview)
  - [Protocol](#protocol)
  - [Implementations](#implementations)

# Introduction

Each time a node publishes an updated IPNS record for a particular key it is propagated by the router into the network where network nodes can choose to accept or reject the new record.
When a node attempts to retrieve an IPNS record from the network it uses the router to query for the IPNS record(s) associated with the IPNS key; the node then validates the received records.

In this spec we address building a router based on a PubSub system, particularly focusing on libp2p PubSub.

# PubSub Protocol Overview

The protocol has four components:
- [IPNS Records and Validation](/README.md)
- [libp2p PubSub](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/pubsub)
- Translating an IPNS record name to/from a PubSub topic
- Layering persistence onto libp2p PubSub

# Translating an IPNS record name to/from a PubSub topic

For a given IPNS local record key described in the IPNS Specification the PubSub topic is:

> **Topic format:** `/record/base64url-unpadded(key)`

Author: Good point about the inconsistency, there's two issues here:

1) I think that area of the IPNS spec could use some clarification. Here, we're actually referring to the [ipfs/specs/naming#routing-record](https://github.com/ipfs/specs/tree/a370a6aa2345b251a4c04d37b8c50d3aa8f2701f/naming#routing-record) `/ipns/BINARY_ID`.
2) This spec is currently using `/record` instead of `/ipns`. Should we make it use `/ipns`? If starting with `/ipns` is not necessary for routing records across multiple routers then we should probably just remove the section on routing records.

What do you think?

> **Topic format:** `/record/base64url-unpadded(key)`

Author: I asked @Stebalien what he thought about this and his understanding of the linked IPNS is that:

local-record = what we put in a local datastore = `/ipns/base32(key)` where `key = multihash of IPNS public key`
routing-record = what the form of the routing record is (`BINARY_ID = binary representation of key` where `key = multihash of IPNS public key`

This means our topic format is `/record/base64url-unpadded(BINARY_ID)`. However, we should give BINARY_ID a new name in the other spec that makes more sense. One set of words we tend to use is `IPNS private key = signing key, IPNS public key = verification key, IPNS key = multihash(IPNS public key)`. However, we could probably use better words, any suggestions?

  - [Integration with IPFS](#integration-with-ipfs)

# Introduction

Each time a node publishes an updated IPNS record for a particular key it is propagated by the router into the network where network nodes can choose to accept or reject the new record.
When a node attempts to retrieve an IPNS record from the network it uses the router to query for the IPNS record(s) associated with the IPNS key; the node then validates the received records.

In this spec we address building a router based on a PubSub system, particularly focusing on libp2p PubSub.

# PubSub Protocol Overview

The protocol has four components:
- [IPNS Records and Validation](/README.md)
- [libp2p PubSub](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/pubsub)
- Translating an IPNS record name to/from a PubSub topic
- Layering persistence onto libp2p PubSub

# Translating an IPNS record name to/from a PubSub topic

For a given IPNS local record key described in the IPNS Specification the PubSub topic is:

**Topic format:** `/record/base64url-unpadded(key)`

where base64url-unpadded is an unpadded base64url as specified in [IETF RFC 4648](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4648)

# Layering persistence onto libp2p PubSub

> libp2p PubSub does not have any notion of persistent data built into it. However, we can layer persistence on top of PubSub by utilizing [libp2p Fetch](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/).

Author: This is just a placeholder, I'm going to update this with the PR to the Fetch spec once it's published (hopefully today)

> libp2p PubSub does not have any notion of persistent data built into it. However, we can layer persistence on top of PubSub by utilizing [libp2p Fetch](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/).

Author: Updated

The protocol has the following steps:
1. Start State: Node `A` subscribes to the PubSub topic `t` corresponding to the local IPNS record key `k`
2. `A` notices that a node `B` has connected to it and subscribed to `t`

> 3. Some time passes (might be 0 seconds, or could use a more complex system to determine the duration)

Author: It's the other way, `Fetch` is a pull protocol so when `B` joins it will send out mass `Fetch`s to nodes as they connect to it. However, it's not like this is a heavy protocol and all the nodes have already established connections with us and sent us `Subscribe` RPCs over PubSub.

If an IPNS-over-PubSub wants to have a handler-pool to throttle, or wants to wait some amount of time based on the last `Fetch` they sent that's absolutely acceptable. I don't think 0 is too problematic though.

> 3. Some time passes (might be 0 seconds, or could use a more complex system to determine the duration)

Reviewer: Got it, thanks for explanation!

> 3. Some time passes (might be 0 seconds, or could use a more complex system to determine the duration)

Author: Referenced your concern in the go implementation [PR](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p-pubsub-router/pull/33/files#r314280601)

If you have more comments to add, take a look there since this is probably more of an implementation specific discussion then spec related.

4. `A` sends `B` a Fetch request for `k`

> 5. If Fetch returns a record that supersedes `A`'s current record then `A` updates its record and Publishes it to the network

Author: It only Publishes on PubSub, all of this is specific to the router. If/when we define a multiple resolver spec (#198), we'll deal with it then.

However, in the current Go implementation of the spec we don't even want to do a `name publish` for two reasons:

1. We currently have no implementations with 3rd party republishing outside of IPNS-over-PubSub, so doing the `name publish` equivalent won't even work
2. Given the limited number of IPNS record transports currently in use we can probably assume that if a party is publishing an update to us over PubSub it probably did a DHT update (however, this is dependent on how we resolve #198)

Note: PubSub does not guarantee that the a message sent by a peer `A` will be received by a peer `B` and it's possible
(e.g. in systems like [gossipsub](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/tree/master/pubsub/gossipsub))
that this is true even if `A` and `B` are already connected. Therefore, whenever `A` notices **any** node that has
connected to it and subscribed to `t` it should run the Fetch protocol as described above. However, developers may have routers
with properties that allow the amount of time in step 3 to increase arbitrarily large (including infinite) amounts.

# Protocol

A node `A` putting and getting updates to an IPNS key `k`, with computed PubSub topic `t`

1. PubSub subscribe to `t`
2. Run the persistence protocol, both to fetch data and return data to those that request it
3. When updating a record do a PubSub Publish and keep the record locally

> 4. When receiving a record if it's better than the current record keep it and republish the message

Author: Maybe, I figured "best" was something that should be defined in the IPNS Spec and I tried to stay away from doubly defining things.

Thoughts?

> 4. When receiving a record if it's better than the current record keep it and republish the message

Reviewer: yes, "best" is ok, as long we define it before this list.

> 4. When receiving a record if it's better than the current record keep it and republish the message

Author: I added defining "best" to this issue https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/205#issuecomment-521615574 since it should be defined for IPNS in general instead of being transport specific.

> 4. When receiving a record if it's better than the current record keep it and republish the message

Author: Also I might be wrong here, but I like the more ambiguous language of "better" over "more up to date" because of oddities like if the sequence numbers are the same, but the data fields are different.

5. (Optional) Periodically republish the best record available

> Note: 5 is optional because it is not necessary. However, receiving duplicate records are already handled efficiently

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: 5 is optional because it is not necessary for the basic functionality. It can be an opt-in for IPNS names user wants to keep alive (e.g. by pinning an IPNS path). 

Note: Receiving duplicate records are already handled efficiently
```

Author: > Worth mentioning how being optional makes it a very useful feature:

I don't think it adds any utility if the `Fetch` protocol is being called properly since any time a node connects to another one those two nodes will use `Fetch` to synchronize their state and propagate any updates they receive. So when a node gets a new peer it should synchronize with that peer's state. Because their should never be a time (aside from at the very beginning) when two neighboring nodes are out of sync then the entire connected network should be in sync.

Reviewer: Right. I guess this spec is not a good place for mentioning "IPNS pinning/following".  The spec for multiple resolvers (https://github.com/ipfs/specs/issues/198) will be a better place for it.

Author: True, but also the rebroadcast functionality isn't actually necessary for pinning/following since the use of `Fetch` + propagating any fetched updates is essentially a more efficient and faster version of rebroadcast.
